data mesh blog post (#438)
kestra-io/docs: content/blogs/2023-08-16-datamesh.md

With Kestra incorporating full integration of CI/CD tools,  such as Terraform and GitHub Action, the Data Platform team was able to maintain complete control over deployment and resource management. Kestra's API exposure of all its components also allowed for further customization when required.

For instance, a specific interface was constructed for business users to import data into the customer data platform (CDP), displaying columns, data types, and destinations. This interface then automatically created a Kestra flow to import the data into the CDP. Data practitioners had access to customized tools that improved automation while maintaining excellent governance practices.

The adoption of a simple yet scalable data mesh structure empowered business teams to independently produce and manage their data pipelines.

Here are some examples and concrete use cases driven by the adoption of Kestra and the data mesh organization:

---

### Scale Data Analysts & Data Scientists Work ###

> Data analysts and data scientists often complain about doing too much work around data wrangling instead of focusing on core business problems.
> To scale practices and help data practitioners work on real problems, they use Kestra to automate SQL pipeline creation through the tight integration of Terraform with Kestra.
> 
> This workflow allows to express SQL queries and table schema in Git and build Kestra flows automatically.
> It gives more freedom for analysts and greatly simplifies their daily work as they only have to focus on SQL.
> 
> It has been possible thanks to Kestra abstraction and Terraform integration. Using parameterized flows, one can build very complex flows while providing a simple abstraction to end users such as data analysts or data scientists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data analysts and scientists often spend more time on data wrangling than on core business problems. To scale practices and help data practitioners work on real problems, they use Kestra to automate SQL pipeline creation through the tight integration of Terraform with Kestra. This workflow allows to express SQL queries and table schema in Git and build Kestra flows automatically. It greatly simplifies their daily work as they only have to focus on SQL. 
```

shorter is better :)

1.  They used generic Terraform code to create Kestra flows directly from SQL scripts, simplifying the pipeline creation process.

2.  For data table and view creation, they employed generic Terraform code that could interpret native Google API JSON responses (from the 'bq show' command).

3.  They adhered to a standard folder tree structure in Git repositories for storing SQL scripts and schema definitions, facilitating easy navigation and management.

4.  They also introduced feed type management (WRITE_APPEND, WRITE_TRUNCATE, MODE_DELTA), to accommodate different data handling needs.

---

### Collect Customer Feedback into the Data Warehouse ###

![topology](/blogs/2023-08-16-datamesh/topology.png)

Due to their extensive product range, collecting and ingesting customer feedback into a centralized system was crucial. 

To do so, they implemented a robust data flow within Kestra. This flow involves four REST APIs provided by Qualtrics (customer feedback tool) for data collection. 

To optimize performances and avoid resource overutilization, the data collection process is performed in batches of five, with parallelization using Kestra's workflow capabilities.

> To handle large volumes of collected data efficiently, the flow includes segmentation of API calls and transformation operations on historical data. This approach helps dilute the data volume and improve performance. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To handle large volumes of collected data efficiently, the flow includes segmentation of API calls and transformation operations on historical data. This approach helps dilute the large data volume and improves performance. 
```

The received JSON data from Qualtrics is unzipped within a Docker environment. Python scripts are then used to transform the JSON, applying recursive functions for standardization, field transposition/renaming, and pivoting surveys into a generic key/value format for storage in BigQuery.

---

### Custom Plugins: From Collection to Centralization
They aimed to further simplify the ingestion process and eliminate the burden of data loading. To meet this need, they developed a custom Kestra plugin, which automated several essential steps in their data handling process:

- **Archiving incoming data**: The plugin archives incoming data to a Google Cloud Storage Bucket, providing a reliable backup.

- **Validating data**: To prevent bad data ingestion, the plugin technically validates the data using an Avro schema. This ensures the appropriate typing (integer, date, etc.) of all incoming data.

> - **Data versioning**: The plugin creates a new version of data if a breaking change in the schema occurs, ensuring continuity and consistency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Data versioning**: The plugin creates a new version of data if a breaking change in the schema occurs, ensuring continuity and consistency. You can think of it as their implementation of data contracts within Kestra.
```

- **Appending technical columns**: Technical columns such as data load time, execution ID are appended by the plugin, allowing full lineage tracing in the data warehouse.

- **Loading data into a temporary table**: Before final processing, the data is first loaded into a temporary table.

> - **Quality checks**: The plugin validates data quality based on specific business rules (upper/lower bound checks, key validation with referential, deduplication, etc.) before loading into the Operational Data Store (ODS).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Quality checks**: The plugin validates data quality based on specific business rules (upper/lower bound checks, key validation with referential integrity checks, deduplication, etc.) before loading it into the Operational Data Store (ODS).
```

- **ODS loading**: The cleaned, validated data is finally loaded into the ODS, providing a mirror image of data from the incoming system.

> Data transfer was set up via HTTPS directly to the Kestra API, reducing dependencies. In most cases, a simple curl command was used for triggering ingestion, or a straightforward HTTP client was developed to reach the Kestra API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data transfer was set up via HTTPS directly to the Kestra API, reducing dependencies. In most cases, a simple `curl` command was used for triggering ingestion, or a straightforward HTTP client was developed to reach the Kestra API.
```

---

### Enhance Supply with Report Automation ###
To support charitable initiatives, each store allocates a portion of the margin to be donated to program-affiliated associations. The task to calculate these sums, inform store leaders, and provide payment details is managed by Kestra.

> The data platform team used Kestra's capabilities to develop a dedicated workflow to handle this process. This workflow calculates the precise amounts to be allocated based on store performance metrics and other relevant data. The resulting sums are then prepared for distribution to each Leader Perf at the respective stores.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data platform team used Kestra's capabilities to develop a dedicated workflow to handle this process. This workflow calculates the precise amounts to be allocated based on store performance metrics and other relevant data. The resulting sums are then prepared for distribution to the respective stores.
```
either explain what is Leader Perf or don't mention it

it confused me a lot :)

> The flow then initiates Kestra's email tasks to generate personalized emails and then the notification task to send a message to the store manager. These emails, addressed to each Leader Perf, detail the exact sum to be contributed and provide clear instructions on the payment process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The flow then initiates Kestra's email tasks to generate personalized emails and the notification task to send a message to the store manager. These emails detail the exact sum to be contributed and provide clear instructions on the payment process.
```
same

> Despite the intricacies of handling large volumes of data and coordinating personalized communication across numerous stores, the overall task did not pose a significant challenge. Thanks to Kestra's efficient orchestration capabilities, the process of creating the files, generating the emails, and dispatching them was not only simple but also highly efficient.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite the intricacies of handling large volumes of data and coordinating personalized communication across numerous stores, the overall task was relatively easy. Thanks to Kestra's efficient orchestration capabilities, creating the files, generating the emails, and dispatching them were simple and efficient.
```

> ## Sustaining Growth at Scale ##

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---

## Sustaining Growth at Scale 
```

![metrics Kestra](/blogs/2023-08-16-datamesh/metrics.png)

Before Kestra integration, domain teams were executing less than half a million tasks every month. They used tools such as Talend, scheduled by DollarU or AWA but it was a big bottleneck to move toward cloud and scale processes.

However, with the shift to a data mesh organization and Kestra's integration, their task management surged to over 5 million tasks monthly, which amounts to 75 days of processing every single day!

> Such growth is usually really hard to maintain, but thanks to Kestra syntax and the smart organization adopted, maintainability was not a problem at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That growth was not possible with Apache Airflow.
```

1. **Complexity in Simple Tasks**: The creation of workflows, previously straightforward, turned into a time-consuming task. Designing and maintaining DAGs amplified the complexity, causing processing delays and even generating bottlenecks instead of eliminating them.

2. **Reliability Issues**: Airflow proved to be sensitive to code quality, with tasks often failing due to the orchestrator itself or errors in the code. This resulted in a substantial amount of time being spent on debugging and addressing these issues, reducing overall productivity.

3. **Long Processing Times**: In some cases, the duration of data flows orchestrated by Airflow was twenty times longer than the legacy flow it was supposed to replace, making it unsuitable for the low-latency, high-throughput requirements of their data operations. Airflow required a significant amount of CPU and memory resources to handle even moderate workloads, leading to increased infrastructure costs and potential performance bottlenecks.

> 4. **Expensive**: The cost of using Google Cloud Composer escalated dramatically due to the involvement of many teams and the need to maintain multiple secured environments. With the company experiencing continuous growth, maintaining the managed version of Airflow would become financially unfeasible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. **Expensive**: The cost of using Google Cloud Composer escalated dramatically due to the involvement of many teams and the need to maintain multiple secured environments. With the company experiencing continuous growth, supporting multiple managed  Airflow environments would become financially unfeasible.
```

> These limitations led the company to realize that their data orchestration needs wouldn't be met by Airflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These limitations made the company realize that Airflow couldn't meet its data orchestration needs.
```

> ### Kestra's Features Overcome Airflow's Failure ###

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### How Kestra Has Overcome Airflow's Limitations
```

> Kestra, with its unique features and capabilities, addressed the issues that they faced with Airflow, providing a more efficient and reliable data orchestration solution:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kestra, with its unique architecture, addressed the issues that they faced with Airflow, providing a simpler, faster, and more reliable data orchestration solution:
```

> 1. **The issue of Complexity**: Kestra is a Declarative Data Orchestrator, which means it allows users to describe workflows and tasks using a simple, high-level language (YAML). This approach simplifies workflow creation and management, making it easier to define, maintain, and iterate data pipelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **The issue of Complexity**: Kestra is a Declarative Data Orchestrator, which means it allows users to describe workflows and tasks using a simple, high-level language (YAML). This approach simplifies workflow creation and management, making defining, maintaining, and iterating on building data pipelines easier.
```

> 2. **The issue of Reliability:**: Kestra's focus on code quality and its robust error-handling capabilities ensured that tasks were no longer prone to failures due to the orchestrator itself or errors in the code. This resulted in fewer debugging sessions and reduced time spent on addressing issues, leading to increased overall productivity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Reliable Architecture**: Kestra's robust architecture ensured tasks were no longer prone to failures due to the orchestrator, increasing overall productivity.
```

3. **The issue of Processing Times**: Kestra's ability to efficiently orchestrate data flows led to significantly shorter processing times. Kestra's processing times make it a very suitable solution for their low-latency, high-throughput data operations requirements.

> 4. **Cost Saving**: Kestra's lightweight, event-driven architecture minimized CPU and memory resource consumption. This allowed them to handle even complex workloads without incurring high infrastructure costs or performance bottlenecks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. **Cost Savings**: Kestra's lightweight, event-driven architecture minimized CPU and memory resource consumption, allowing the organization to handle even complex workloads without incurring high infrastructure costs or performance bottlenecks.
```

>"In less than a month, with no previous experience in continuous deployment and data orchestration, I felt autonomous with my data flows and could collaborate with my teammates. Kestra had become a total necessity for me." *Data engineer* 

> ## Orchestrate the Data mesh ##

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---

## Orchestrate the Data mesh ##
```

divider would be useful here

![data mesh](/blogs/2023-08-16-datamesh/datamesh.webp)

> Alongside Kestra integration, [data mesh](https://www.datamesh-architecture.com/) came naturally through the use of Kestra and its accessibility for various data practitioner profiles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After adopting Kestra, the team has gained enough confidence and trust in its data infrastructure to implement [data mesh](https://www.datamesh-architecture.com/).
```

In a data mesh system, different data products take ownership of their respective data models, metrics, and reports, promoting an organizational structure where teams are fully responsible for their specific data domains.

The data mesh structure also emphasized the importance of a "self-serve data platform", with dedicated Data Platform teams providing the necessary tools and abstractions for domain teams to build upon.

Kestra proved invaluable in this context, catering to both novice and seasoned users. The intuitive UI facilitated swift development, while the integration of plugins and scripting capabilities allowed for the creation of highly customized pipelines.

With Kestra incorporating full integration of CI/CD tools,  such as Terraform and GitHub Action, the Data Platform team was able to maintain complete control over deployment and resource management. Kestra's API exposure of all its components also allowed for further customization when required.

> For instance, a specific interface was constructed for business users to import data into the customer data platform (CDP), demonstrating columns, data types, and destinations. This interface then automatically created a Kestra flow to import the data into the CDP. Data practitioners had access to customized tools that improved automation while maintaining excellent governance practices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, a specific interface was constructed for business users to import data into the customer data platform (CDP), displaying columns, data types, and destinations. This interface then automatically created a Kestra flow to import the data into the CDP. Data practitioners had access to customized tools that improved automation while maintaining excellent governance practices.
```

The adoption of a simple yet scalable data mesh structure empowered business teams to independently produce and manage their data pipelines. Given the teams' in-depth understanding of their specific needs and the most effective methods of production, along with Kestra's accessibility and simplicity, they were ideally positioned to execute these tasks. This capability marked a substantial step towards true self-service data operations.

> Here are some examples and concrete use cases driven by the adoption of Kestra and the data mesh organization:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The section below provides concrete use cases enabled by adopting Kestra and data mesh.
```

> Here are some examples and concrete use cases driven by the adoption of Kestra and the data mesh organization:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---

> ### Scale Data Analysts & Data Scientists Work ###

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Use cases 

The following section provides concrete use cases enabled by adopting Kestra and data mesh.

### Scale Data Analysis & Data Science
```
